[Music]
okay forget about alien invasions or
giant meteors rushing toward earth
there's something much more dangerous
lurking in space and it's called strange
matter while people don't know much
about it
experts are sure that under particular
conditions this stuff would be able to
eat our planet alive but to grasp the
concept of strange matter better we
first need to understand protons
neutrons and neutron stars so look at
your hand it's made up of tiny cells if
you start to zoom in on these cells
you'll see a bunch of molecules keep
going and you'll notice that molecules
consist of atoms which have protons and
neutrons in their nucleus outside of all
that you have electrons flying around in
small clouds if you could see all this
up close you'd find that these particles
aren't crammed together in a tiny space
in fact there's enough room between them
to make you wonder why your hand feels
solid at all but when you touch or press
your hand
all those atoms resist the force and the
harder you press the more atoms stop you
but what if you push really really hard
oh then you'll eventually force the
nuclei together and fuse some new
elements not that this is possible if
it's your hand you squeeze really hard
but it can happen with a neutron star
imagine this a super powerful and
massive star is reaching the end of its
life one of the potential scenarios is
that it runs out of its nuclear fuel and
in a blinding bursts collapses under its
own gravity if the star had been massive
enough it'll produce a black hole but if
it wasn't that big a neutron star will
appear in its place at about ten miles
across a neutron star is itsy-bitsy when
we're talking about stars in general but
at the same time this small space is
unbelievably dense
about 1.4 times the mass of the Sun it
means that just one teaspoon of neutron
star would weigh a staggering 10 million
tonnes scientists say that one day these
neutrons can get tired of holding all
that weight and the structure keeping
the entire thing together will collapse
this in turn leads to the appearance of
a quark star which is even smaller and
denser than a neutron star now let's say
the pressure inside a quark star is
getting stronger as a result things
called strange quarks can appear in its
core
they've been dubbed strange because well
they don't behave like normal quarks I
would have gone with quirky quarks but
that's just me really simply put if
these strange quarks are numerous enough
they create strange matter which is
unique and unlike any matter you find on
earth oh yeah and it could be the most
dangerous thing in our universe hang on
I'm getting there but first let's
conduct a virtual experiment with
something more familiar than a neutron
star we'll take an iron atom and start
to squeeze it with tremendous force
sooner or later the atoms neutrons and
protons will blow apart into those quark
things add some more pressure and some
of these quarks will change become
heavier and turn into strange quarks
what we have on our hands now isn't an
iron atom but something called a
strangelet that's a tiny piece of
strange matter oh don't you just love
science strange matter is much heavier
than our matter
besides our dear matter is organized and
predictable it consists of atoms that
are in turn made up of nuclei and
electrons and our quarks are neatly
squeezed into neutrons and protons where
they should be but strange matter whoa
that's a bundle of chaos here's where
the strange part comes in it's quarks
have no boundaries they just totally run
amok wherever and however they want yet
surprisingly among
this particle chaos strange matter
remains stable very dense and impossible
to destruct but that's where it gets a
bit disconcerting strange matter is so
stable that it can exist anywhere in the
universe even outside a neutron star but
the worst thing is that strange matter
may be contagious imagine an innocent
jar of honey that suddenly goes nuts and
decides to consume everything around the
table plates your kitchen.you the whole
galaxy huh what a sticky mess but that's
exactly what may happen if strange
matter was left to roam on its own it's
like the vampire of particle physics
anything it touches can be transformed
into strange matter itself oh yeah but
this stuff is happening way out in space
and neutron stars that are thousands of
light-years away well the thing is when
two neutron stars collide or when a
neutron star crashes into a black hole
these strangelets break free and at
millions of miles per hour these tiny or
not so tiny guys race through space they
can keep going for billions of years
until they come across something they
can consume sadly a strangelet won't
care whether the object it's encountered
is a star or a planet full of life this
space invader would get down to work
right away
and it would soon convert earth and
everything on it into more strange
matter so would there be a way to stop
all this from happening there is one
solution but it seems kind of impossible
at the moment you see to get rid of
strange matter the only thing we could
do is toss it into a black hole but this
escape plan raises all kinds of
questions itself I mean let's even say
that we're at a point where humankind
can travel through space star wars style
okay but still in order to deposit the
dangerous stuff you need to get really
close to the black hole
let's picture what would happen as you
approach it first you'll notice some
blackness blotting out the light from
surrounding stars
that's just how strong the gravity of a
black hole is not even light can pass
through it hence the name as soon as you
get to the black hole's edge aka the
event horizon you won't be able to turn
back because it's the point of no return
even if you were super strong or were
traveling at the speed of light you
still wouldn't be able to escape the
immense gravitational pull plus you
wouldn't even be able to reach the event
horizon in the first place you'd be
spaghetti by that no for real it's
actually called spaghettification and it
happens when something has stretched
paper thin by a black hole's
gravitational field everything that
approaches a black hole gets broken down
into individual atoms and we become long
thin pasta not the best way to go I'm
afraid yeah it'd be a tough and
dangerous feat to transport and throw
this strange matter into a black hole
by the way how would you transport it
there anyway you could probably use some
kind of catapult but that raises another
question how are you gonna prevent the
strange matter from consuming this
catapult your spacecraft or you even in
this hypothetical sci-fi space travel
scenario it still seems impossible in
any case at this point strange matter is
just a theory that hasn't been confirmed
yet interestingly enough physicists have
considered creating strange matter in a
particle accelerator not unlike the
Large Hadron Collider
luckily they later came to the
conclusion that it's impossible to do
since particle accelerators get so hot
that they would immediately melt any
appearing strangelets whoo what a relief
but I'd still like to politely ask them
not to try it please well it might be
comforting to know that even if
scientists managed to create some
strange matter
it'd be too unstable to live long enough
to consume nearby atoms plus the strange
matter that would appear as a result of
the experiment would most likely be
positive
we charged such strangelets aren't too
dangerous for our world sure they'd be
happy to snack on nearby electrons but
they probably wouldn't provoke that
terrible chain reaction I just told you
about probably in any case no
strangelets have ever invaded earth and
all the billions of years of its
existence which means that this strange
invasion is highly unlikely to happen at
least not anytime soon so don't sweat it
and don't worry about that jar of honey
sitting on the kitchen counter do you
think it's possible for a stray space
strangelet to infect our planet can you
say stray space strangelet five times
real fast let me know if you can and
what else you're thinking about down in
the comments and if you love all things
space related then give this video a lot
share with a friend and head over to the
bright side for more videos to satisfy
all your cosmic needs